=================================================
Abstraction - Two Hour Track Challenge - Season 2
Released: January 2018
=================================================

Here are some brief thoughts written down while listening to the album. Hope you enjoy :)

All of these songs were made within a two hour time limit. If you wanted to watch one of these songs get made in real time, you can match up the track name and find it on this YouTube playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLW08UHPY2AEq9MvNNqOSpRTP4Cx92ZNId

Enjoy!

-----


NAVIGATING SPACE
----------------
So one of the downsides of holding off on writing commentary for well over a year is I can't remember if some of these were related to a specific music challenge or not. I think a lot of the tracks in this albume were inspired by the Video Game Music Academy challenges, but not all of them. Having chill streams is a great way to take a "break" from the stress of an actual challenge.

I do enjoy this track, even if it's a bit simple. The harmonization of the melody is a nice touch. I think I recently figured out how to make that work more reliably.


POCKETMANZ
----------
All right, this one is obvious, the challenge was to make something sound like it came from the Pokemon games. I think the guitar came out a bit janky since I'm not really well versed in ripping solos like that, but I'm pretty pleased with how the rest of it came out, especially the drums.

With challenges like this, I do quite a bit of research beforehand, but once I start I try to not refer to anything because playing copyrighted music on stream is a big no-no for YouTube and other places.

Overall I think it turned out pretty accurate. I did sell this one on stock music sites and at least a half dozen people bought it over the last year, so there's that hah.


AERIAL PURSUIT
--------------
Apparently, when naming files, I didn't know how to spell "aerial" since it was "airial". Oops.

I really enjoy the rhythmic lead on this, has a lot of great snap to it. This is often because there is an extreme pitch bend or something similar at the start of the note so it has a big punch. The bend is so fast that it's not distinctly audible, but it works to cut through the rest of the mix.

I think this song was a suggestion from a Patreon subscriber, they were making a video game and needed some action-y music.


NON-STANDARD DEVIATION
----------------------
This song is the best. The challenge was to create a melodic line using only the letters in my name that are also notes in a scale (A-G). So I had BEAEGEEBE and ran with it. This also introduced a zany time signature as well, which was a lot of fun.

I don't do a lot of singing on my songs, but this one also convinced me that I should try to do it more often. After adding a bit of auto-tune things worked out pretty well.

I used this song inside the Creationism album as well, if I remember correctly. Definitely one of my favorites from this season!


SOLITARY MARCH
--------------
The challenge this time around was to create ambient and drone music. I think it turned out pretty cool overall. I like building all these layers and seeing what happens when they all mix together. Using organic stuff like strings and woodwinds help add a layer of "air" on top of the bed of sound.

As it goes with most of these challenges, I establish that I can do the theme and then I go off on my own tangent. Traditionally, drone music doesn't have drums or a bass line or anything, but I would rather make a song with some interest to it than just complete the challenge and walk away.

Drone music has it's place, for sure, but not really with the 2HTC stuff. Partially because the drone parts often only take like a half hour to make!


SAD COOKIE
----------
So much earlier in the 2HTC series, I used fortune cookies to prompt some song themes. Either using the sentiment or feeling from the cookie message, or using the words as the title. I brought two fortune cookies to the challenge and both had absolute garbage fortunes in them. I couldn't use either.

So that's where the song title came from.

As far as the song, I kind of enjoy how it lopes along. It doesn't really get any momentum, but it still works to move forward and progress. The piano that floats over everything is similarly disjointed. Something about this really works for me.

This was also used in the Creationism album. I definitely used a lot of the 2HTC songs in that album, which I feel is totally fine. It was fun to adapt those songs into something new and recontextualize them with words.


RUNNING OUT OF VACATION
-----------------------
I don't think this one had a specific challenge associated with it. I am pretty sure I had just been messing with chord progressions and found something I felt was neat. I just kinda ran with it from there.

I got to use the melodica though! That's always a good thing. It's always interesting how the melodica kinda goes in fits and starts. Sometimes it's used in three episodes in a row, then it goes out of style for a few months, then it comes back.

This track is super chill though, I love the "beach" songs that come out of this series sometimes.


SWAG WITH A DOLLAR SIGN INSTEAD OF AN S
---------------------------------------
Aside from winning the "longest title" award for all challenges so far, I actually really dig where this track came from. The challenge was to create a song that had silence in it. It is always scary to leave "space" in your songs, very vulnerable for some reason.

But this song turned out super cool. Nice chill bass and plucks. Nothing too fancy or groundbreaking, but still right up my alley.

I can't remember where the giggle came from, I think it was a vocal sample I got a long time ago. I might have been trying to add vocals and found that instead. Perfect fit.


LAYERED LIKE A CAKE
-------------------
So this track came about from a personal challenge to create a song with multiple layers to it. I had been working on my game Color Jumper pretty heavily at the time and needed music for the demo. However, I wanted to have music with layers, so it would get more or less intense based upon the player's position in the game and how well they were doing.

So my challenge was to create a song that could be split into multiple layers of intensity.

In the end, the Color Jumper demo used this song, which was well received. The final game had a brand new soundtrack made for it though because the general feeling of this track just didn't gel with the direction of the game overall. Honestly, I still think this is a fine song though.


AZURE SKIES
-----------
All right, so this is a tough one. The challenge was to take an old melody you wrote and enjoyed, then flip it and try to write a completely different song out of it.

Because of that, things feel a bit disjointed. Overall, I kinda like how the melody floats over everything else, but some of the chord choices are a bit weird. Creating the piano bit to fit was fun though.

Some of these challenges are definitely more difficult that others, overall. I enjoy the difficulty, but sometimes it makes a song that's a little... weird.


SPIRIT OF THE DAWN
------------------
I'm not sure if there was a challenge associated with this one, I know I had fun playing some bass though! Not sure what's going on with the drums here. I kinda like how things are all disjointed though.

Something I struggle with is the whole idea that everything doesn't have to be perfect. This goes for on-the-grid perfect rhythms, or even synthesizers that are exactly pitch perfect. I think music thrives on things being a bit off, sometimes. Giving it character and more human-ness.

It seems that at this point I had been using a lot of piano and stuff, another trend that comes and goes. While streaming, I often have a piano open because I celebrate new followers and the like with a little piano solo just for them. It's a fun break from writing a song as well, let's me disconnect from the project and do something different for a moment.


SCARLET DANGERFIELD, INTERNATIONAL SPY
--------------------------------------
This challenge was focused on a super-secret meeting between two people. Something mysterious. I really enjoyed this one actually. The name Scarlet Dangerfield was made up during the stream, but of course it's a real person. I sent her the song on Twitter after the stream was over, but never got a real response. Oh well.

I like how this one turned out though! Really chill and mysterious. The bass line was especially fun.


INTO THE MACHINE
----------------
Another challenge to make aggressive boss music! I'm really bad at these, I feel, but part of the point of doing them is to expand my boundaries. Most of the time I feel my problem is with the detail and not as much the execution. Things could feel tighter in general, the main lead is a bit too... whiny.

But the point here is to expand boundaries and cataloging even the songs that I feel aren't perfectly executed helps in finding what will work better next time!


RESPECT THE WIG
---------------
And we move to probably my favorite song of this season. This one was unimaginably fun to put together. The challenge was to make a Baroque-sounding song. I was very scared of this challenge going into it because I don't know much about proper music theory, but once I got momentum on this track it was super fun to add more layers.

And this is the exact contrast of Into the Machine. I didn't know what I was going to do going into this challenge, but in this case things turned out really cool. I think that's why this challenge is so fun, because something can blossom out of the weirdest circumstances.


THE SPOOPY SPOODER FOREST
-------------------------
All right, so the challenge this time around was to only use pizzacato (plucked) strings. I kinda cheated near the end of the song using long, drawn out string plucks to sound like chords. Like I mentioned earlier, I'd rather make the song sound interesting than adhere to the challenge guidelines 100%

I like this one though, it's weird and bouncy. The title was suggested by a stream viewer (TheFormalGhost, I think) and I feel it fits really well. Spooky, but in a cartoony way almost.


KITTEN HEAVEN
-------------
This song was made using ONLY sounds I recorded from our cats. There are sounds of them eating and meowing and romping, all mashed together to make a song. I really like it, but it's very hard for me to listen to these days. 2017 was an extremely tough year for our family and we lost 3 of our cats in very rapid succession. It's tough to hear their very distinct meows pop through the song.

I'm glad that this song was made to memorialize them in some way though. I miss them :c


MAKE IT SNAPPY
--------------
Going off the previous challenge to make a song using limited samples, I took it a step further to make a song using ONLY the sound of a finger snap. Most of the challenge came down to sound design and turning the very short sound into a percussion section and melodies and stuff, but it all came together.

Sometimes I feel bad when songs are so short like this, but sometimes I gotta focus more on the design of the sounds than just knocking out a super long arrangement. The quality of a song isn't defined by its length!


DRIFTING SOLACE
---------------
I want to think that this song was based off a challenge, but I can't remember for the life of me what it would be. I just like how it floats along though, very serene.

A lot of really fun elements came together in this song, the floaty section and then introducing the electric piano stuff, and then going back to working with vocals again. Recording vocals on camera is scary for me, but when put into the song itself, things seem to fit so well.

Sometimes I trash ideas, but not super often with vocals. Plus, there's always autotune.


THE COMPOSER QUEST
------------------
So Composer Quest was a podcast run by my buddy Charlie McCarron and I highly suggest you take the time to listen to it if you are interested in music at all. He talks about all sorts of stuff, from music, to composition, to psychology, to crazy contraptions people have made.

I was fortunate enough to be interviewed TWICE on the podcast. In each interview he asks the the interview-ee to make a theme for that episode. Since we talked about the Two Hour Track Challenge and other stuff, I felt it was necessary to make the theme on stream, it turned out cool! Switching through lots of genres.

I miss Composer Quest though, it was a great podcast. All the voice clips from Creationism came from that show.


TRUST IS A NON-ISSUE
--------------------
Wait, I take it back, I think this song was the challenge where it was the secret meeting! This one sure is kinda spooky isn't it? I think this is where I started getting hooked on that theremin-sounding instrument as well. I definitely use that a lot more in future songs.

I like how this one came together though. The vocals are super in the background and add to the spooky atmosphere. I also did some simple guitar stuff too! Good job, past Ben. Along with vocals, I'm very self-conscious about playing guitar on stream, mostly because I'm not as good as I want to be.


DECEMBER WINDS
--------------
In the past, I broke the 2HTC seasons up arbitrarily, so The Composer Quest used to be the end of Season 2, but once I decided to start releasing albums, I wanted things to be more logically separated. I decided to do every 6 months, which feels like a good break point.

I actually really enjoy how this song came together. The open and airy feeling at the beginning leading to a VERY fast and upbeat section in the middle is a crazy cool transition. Reminds me a little bit of how The Composer Quest is structured, but with a bit more electronic vibe to it.


-----

So that's the end of Season 2 of the Two Hour Track Challenge. I feel like progress was made, though things are still a little rough around the edges. Now, a year later, it's weird to look back at these songs and judge them as being a little raw. But I honestly thing they are unique and special in their own way.

I kind of just glossed over the entire album while it played, so please don't hesitate to get in touch with me if you have questions, either about a particular song or my songwriting style (links below). I'd be happy to chat!

And if you missed it above, you can watch all these songs get made live on YouTube at this playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLW08UHPY2AEq9MvNNqOSpRTP4Cx92ZNId

-----

Here are a few other places on the Internet where you can find me:

Website:    abstractionmusic.com
Bandcamp:   abstractionmusic.bandcamp.com
Patreon:    patreon.com/ben_burnes
YouTube:    youtube.com/ben_burnes

You can get in contact with me directly through Twitter @ben_burnes, I love to chat with new people!

<3
- Benjamin